this video is brought to you by my
patrons if you'd like to support my
channel and get access to extras like
audio commentaries a patron exclusive
podcast and uncut videos you can join by
clicking the link in the description
nintendo is a company that is perceived
as very conservative socially and in
their business practices
which isn't really wrong there's a
reason they've been able to weather the
ups and downs of the video game industry
for the last four decades without laying
off half of their staff but it's the
socially conservative part that i think
we get wrong
for instance nintendo has this odd dare
i say woke history of action when it
comes to gender in gaming
like
while the gamergate harassment campaign
against
literally anyone who wasn't a straight
white male was going on nintendo
released a video game where their most
iconic characters dressed up as cat boys
and a girl
and meow at each other but nintendo's
gender journey didn't start in 2013.
they've been on this raucous roller
coaster ride since
well
since the original nintendo
entertainment system so let's have a
look back at the grand history of
nintendo and its confusingly progressive
yet conservative stance on gender
not looking forward to the comment
section on this one
[Music]
[Applause]
nintendo was first founded as yamauchi
nintendo in 1889 in kyoto japan at first
they solely produced and marketed
hanafuda playing cards the cards soon
began to rise in popularity and the
company had to expand to meet the
increasing demand fast forward to 1959
when nintendo made a deal with disney to
allow the use of disney's characters on
nintendo's playing cards because disney
can't
not be associated with anything i talk
about apparently in 1963 the company
which had changed its name to the
nintendo playing card company changed
its name once again
this time to simply nintendo by
generalizing their name they were able
to expand their businesses into markets
such as snack foods toy production taxi
companies and
love hotels if you don't know what a
love hotel is it's a type of hotel you
can stay in for a short stay as in
an hour or two what we call a no-tell
motel with a nice lounge that's right
squeaky clean family-friendly nintendo
owned a hotel designed for quick sex
with sex workers and mistresses but
because the typical japanese home at the
time was very small sometimes with
shared living arrangements between the
parents and children these hotels began
to be used by parents to escape their
children for a few hours to
you know go make more children which
lent the establishments a bit more of an
air of legitimacy however all these
ventures eventually failed except toy
production based on some earlier
experience from selling playing cards in
1964 while japan was experiencing an
economic boom the playing card business
reached saturation leading households to
stop buying new playing cards and the
price of nintendo stock dropped from 900
yen to 60 yen per share during the 1960s
nintendo struggled to survive in the
japanese toy industry which was already
being dominated by bandai and had yet to
become the global powerhouse that it is
today but in 1972 the first commercially
available video game console the
magnavox odyssey went on the market
which required a light gun to play
certain games nintendo broke into the
video game industry by producing said
light gun nintendo saw how successful
video games were becoming and took its
first step in the gaming arena by
securing the rights to distribute the
magnavox odyssey in japan at the time
video game consoles were extremely rare
even pong consoles had yet to be
produced so after experiencing success
and helping to sell other companies
products nintendo began developing its
own video games their first video arcade
game was 1975's evr race with a few more
following in the next couple of years
including radarscope and donkey kong
nintendo continued to see success in
producing arcade games including the
original mario brothers game but hid it
big in 1985 when they announced the
famicom or nintendo entertainment system
a bold move considering the industry had
completely cratered out in 1983 but this
little contraption took the world by
storm and nintendo became an icon
through releasing games like super mario
bros the legend of zelda and metroid the
super famicom or super nintendo followed
in 1991 leading to a war between
nintendo and sega for the dominance of
the 16-bit video game generation which
nintendo handily won but consoles
weren't nintendo's only video game
machine handheld gaming was always a
fascination with various companies
though handhelds were usually small
cheap and featured black images that
moved simply by swapping position on the
screen
nintendo's revolutionary game boy was a
clunky though still handheld device with
fully animated graphics like consoles it
could play different games based on
cartridges basically just a teeny tiny
console a philosophy that's carried on
to nintendo's current generation with
the switch though only black and white
and very low res the game boy spurred
nintendo's complete dominance over all
handheld gaming until smartphones this
is where nintendo launched some of its
most profitable titles primarily pokemon
but also popular tie-ins to metroid and
the legend of zelda with fans claiming
that some of each franchise's best
titles were released for the game boy
and eventually the ds in 1994 nintendo
announced that they had sold more than 1
billion game cartridges worldwide
one-tenth of which were mario games at
the same time nintendo announced project
reality a code name for what would later
become known as the nintendo 64 which
helped home console games move from
scrolling 2d images to fully revolving
3d ones and lead the way for some of the
most iconic games in gaming history
including mario 64 and the seminal best
reviewed game of all time legend of
zelda ocarina of time
[Music]
when it comes to content nintendo's
early game library didn't particularly
break the mole as far as storytelling
went woman is in danger man saves woman
stories were kept simple to avoid text
and it's not like the mid-80s were
locked in an era of simplicity final
fantasy 1 made its debut not two years
after super mario and one year after the
legend of zelda and neither was final
fantasy the first turn-based combat rpg
complex narratives were something that
video games explored at the earliest
available opportunity through text
adventures though there can be an
argument to say that even though video
game narratives of this era could be
long and even complex the stories
themselves and especially the characters
weren't really reinventing the wheel
boil it down and a lot of it was still
just sword man saves damsel see in the
long ago video games were seen as a
lesser form of media and especially when
your frame of reference was frogger q
bert and pac-man that wasn't going to
inspire any confidence that one day
we could be using video games to tell
epics that at times can match the pathos
if not the very prestige of cinema
competent storytellers were more liable
to be drawn towards other more
established forms of media like the
novel film or stage when you have a
truly good idea it seemed like a waste
of time to frame it in a media format
that will not be remembered and for
whose audience is incredibly narrow and
also a media format that likes to make
older games unavailable to play but we
won't talk about that in fact when we
look at film and even the novel both of
these were media formats that struggled
to fight for legitimacy early on early
filmmakers had to make do with a lot of
writers who either never managed to make
it big writing for the stage or who had
been forced out of the theatrical
community
and film didn't really begin to take off
until you had those early screenwriters
who really had the imagination to
explore how screen could be used in ways
that the stage could not perhaps it's
worth mentioning here that film actually
got its first artistic jump start
because it was seen as a lesser medium
and so women and black creators who
could not get work in proper art forms
flocked to early film studios where they
had creative freedom they began feeling
out the medium and found ways to make it
visually distinct from theater and
captivate audiences and once it was
clear that this new industry could be
profitable
they were pushed out of these spaces by
english white men who suddenly had an
interest in it funny story actually many
early films would be shot twice once
during the day for the english
production and once at night for a
different language usually spanish while
the white men went home and slept the
hispanic men moved on to the sound
stages having seen what was done earlier
on in the day and went on to improve
upon it in every way a really great
example of this is actually 1933's
dracula fellow lugosi is great but the
spanish version's better but outside of
film some of you may be shocked to hear
due to the fact that you had to read
about 50 of them in high school that the
novel
also did its time as a lesser form of
media though it's considered the staple
format of literature today the novel as
a format was regarded as pulp for most
of its life
the ugly stepchild of poetry non-fiction
essays and stage plays a long format
story which had no real structure
the author was seen as not having had
enough faith in their own idea to
convince a theater troupe to act it out
a last resort for bad ideas if you will
in fact early novels in europe had to
disguise themselves as factual accounts
like with robinson caruso while not the
first novel in human history its
publication date of 1719 is by some
scholars viewed as the birth date of the
novel format and as per a stigma against
made-up stories that were neither poetic
nor theatric author and revel daniel
defoe included a foreword guaranteeing
that this account of a man marooned on
an island who threw a stick at a parrot
because he wanted a pet was entirely
factual it actually was inspired by a
real life story of a man who spent four
years marooned on an island off the
coast of chile but upon meeting said
sailor defoe was so disappointed in the
reality that he decided to fix some of
the more unremarkable details new
artistic formats always take a couple of
generations to find their footing and
really figure out what the boundaries
and limits of their storytelling
capacities can be
each one faces their respective
challenges it wasn't until you had
creators who grew up reading novels that
the advantages of the novel really began
to shine the loose freeform style of
narrative allowed for quick changes of
scene tighter dialogue and given that
there was no poetic meter characters
could be developed and framed through
their vernacular cadence and slang if
you've read much edgar allan poe you
know that this can also be done to a
fault film by contrast to theater
allowed for the director to have greater
artistic control over exactly what the
audience could see
rather than two people on a wide stage
the director could have the audience see
nothing but the speaking character
audiences could see nuances that even
people in the front row never could but
film also had the advantage of cutting
between characters and locations
controlling the emotional pace of a
scene or transferring between the scenes
and control over lighting specific
aspects or even individual characters of
a scene which came to be known as film
editing and cinematography respectively
both of which
are things that are incredibly difficult
to do on stage
and
which the oscars apparently don't care
about anymore
when it came to early games however the
focus was to create an engaging
entertainment experience there wasn't
really a push for political breakdowns
like you'd get in the first four seasons
of game of thrones like early films the
focus was for creators to feel out this
media format what were the limits of
this format what would audiences respond
to how will this technology develop and
in what direction will it drive the
creative side of the developmental
process delivering quality was second to
figuring out how to deliver anything at
all and if i have to say i'm not sure
video games have really figured out what
exactly their role in media is going to
be i feel like what we refer to
collectively as video games is actually
an umbrella term describing several
different and distinct formats of
digital immersion media and without
listing them i feel like the reason so
many big budget games end up being
disappointments
is that they're trying to be so many
different kinds of video games
without actually being good
at any one of them but if there's any
aaa studio that isn't trying to cash in
on the whatever's popular last year
frankensteinian hybrid of skyrim the
last of us final fantasy and
bungie produced halo games and thus
focusing their resources on the game
part of video game
than it would be nintendo and maybe this
is why when other studios in the 1980s
were pushing video games to their
narrative boundaries nintendo was
focusing on minimal for granted
narrative tropes to focus on how to give
their flagship titles a clear and
distinct feeling whereas square would
have spent hours outlining and
suggesting the political and
cosmic world state that led to zelda's
imprisonment
nintendo preferred to focus on game play
and design find a hole in the wall you
get a sword save the princess so yes
nintendo and most studios leaned on
existing narrative tropes that focused
on men as the hero
because in most cultures men dominated
fictional landscapes as protagonists and
principal characters and because
developers were still figuring out how
to code for increasingly complex
technology reinventing the narrative
wheel wasn't really on the to-do list
and while this did lead to a foundation
of misogyny and homophobia in gaming the
narration style that often shafts women
to supporting roles and ignores the
existence of queer people even while
using historical accuracy as an excuse
this shouldn't suggest that there
weren't attempts to subvert these tropes
when i say attempt it is both reverently
and also condemningly because when it
comes to a future space-faring society
where human limitations are expanded by
combat exoskeletons
you'd think it wouldn't be such a big
deal that a woman
could be powerful and yet
samus as a woman was the big reveal in
metroid and even then this was only
revealed after beating the game the
condemnation comes from the fact that
this was set up to be a big deal in the
first place a vision of the future
hundreds of years from now with the same
social expectations is kind of bleak and
also
using underwear to indicate gender
excuse me that's breaking one of the
cardinal rules of science fiction they
bring me to george takes one look at me
and he says you can't wear a bra
underneath that dress he says because
there's no underwear in space and the
man said it was such a conviction too
you know on the other hand my reverence
for this gender reveal post-credit scene
indicates a that nintendo was aware that
their audience would not have picked up
a game with a woman illustrated on the
cover and b they were gonna find a way
to force you to play as a woman even if
you didn't know it nintendo was going to
make probably their most badass
character even to this day a woman and
you have to respect that kind of
creative determination and perhaps to
the benefit of gender representation the
format of metroid games usually does not
permit a whole lot of story and
character because metroid is first and
foremost an action game there isn't
anything to them especially the first
one in the way of character development
samus as a badass doesn't really come
across that way due to cut scenes or
snappy one-liners thrown at vanquished
bosses don't
call me babe badassery is performed
exclusively by unscripted character
actions which could probably be expanded
to a greater statement about the gaming
experience as a whole players are more
likely to connect with and accept
characters the more that they have
direct control over their actions the
more a player is exposed to a
character's capabilities through cut
scenes and references the more likely
they are to be decried as a mary sue or
less likely a gary stew it's worth
mentioning at this point that when the
series veered away from its format in
metroid other m
fans were none too pleased with the
result whereas before samus was powerful
and independent in other m she was
immature prone to weakness being
attributed to her being a woman and
reliant on male characters to be
effective and also other m was
wrought with
overwrought cut scenes that went on for
far too long the more a character is
developed through cut scenes the less a
player is going to be able to believe
that this character is as capable as the
game is trying to tell you
gaming offers the ability to experience
things
that film
could only ever show you maybe this more
cinematic approach can work for certain
games like the last of us or uncharted
but the way the metroid brand had been
established before
fans simply didn't connect samus's
long-standing ability to appeal to
audiences was due to most if not all of
her actions being something that the
player could directly control there is
no need to suspend a player's disbelief
because the player themself
is being a badass by proxy of samus they
wholly believe and understand how samus
is a badass because they are using
samus's toolkit to accomplish the
badassery but it could also be that
samus's long-standing celebration is
something that was grandfathered in from
an era where she was the girl in an
otherwise all-boys club and now that
they're starting to close the binary
gender gap the boys feel pushed out of
what they thought of as their space in a
way that lara croft did not make them
feel threatened because she was a sex
icon where samus was kinda
well
she was literally just
one of the boys until her reveal and
honestly ripping off her helmet to
reveal a full blowout after hours of
explosions and space monsters is one
hell of a serve
[Music]
[Applause]
i mean again the fact that director
yoshio sakamoto needed to basically
trick gamers into fighting aliens while
secretly playing as a woman is
not fantastic especially because many
gamers have since become even more
allergic to women in gaming
which is very disheartening what's
concerning about gaming as a whole is
that games with female protagonists
equally seem to not enjoy using women as
ciphers instead with most of them
propping up a soapbox to either
textually or subtextually discuss their
validity as a woman in the central role
and this becomes more true as studios
spend more money on said game unless
you're a core metroid game then it's
just all the badass stuff the boys are
doing but with a pronoun reskin funny
that i mentioned pronouns actually
because early nintendo dipped its foot
into the gender puddle long before
gamergate bros were old enough to put
together words let alone open up the
trans debate for those in the know you
know what's coming birdo is a mess and
we can look at it as a good mess or a
bad mess but either way the character
isn't a hot mess because nintendo
doesn't really seem to be uncomfortable
with continued inclusion of the
character and ongoing content if you've
gone through any nintendo history videos
then you know that birdo was originally
introduced as a mob enemy in super mario
bros 2
which was originally developed as yumi
kojo doki doki panic but then reskinned
into a sequel to super mario brothers
because they thought the real sequel was
too hard for american gamers which
it's basically the dark souls of mario
games which in contrast to the prior
mario installment also featured princess
peach as a playable character so more
fem rep from early nintendo going
through the game there was no real
indication about birdo's queerness she
had a bow on her head a pixelated bow if
you can pick it out i suppose the
implication was that you were supposed
to automatically think of birdo as she
her while playing and if you went on to
read the instruction manual you'd see
the description for the character quote
he thinks he is a girl okay we're off to
a not great start but
like 1980s he thinks he is a girl he
spits eggs from his mouth he would
rather be called birdetta well great job
nintendo you're dead naming your own
trans character
great start nintendo creative never did
go ahead with bradetta probably more to
do with branding and copyright but they
did begin using exclusively feminine
pronouns in their english material the
gender thing has never since been
addressed with birdo though so even
though she decided not to change her
name i'm very glad that everyone in the
mushroom kingdom respects her transition
the mindset in the 80s was more likely
that birdo's alleged gender confusion
was seen as a great way to contribute to
the wacky zany vibes that made up early
mario games i don't really think there
was any intended statement about making
a trans character a villain the heroic
cast was primarily composed of italians
and mushroom people so i think that this
was meant more to represent the kind of
antics that you would expect from the
world as a whole but it is interesting
to know that in spite of the hot button
gender identity nintendo was interested
in keeping this character around instead
of continuing on with the gender
confusion angle they simplified it to
she her and brought out the visual
elements to better accommodate ongoing
mario vibes now when it comes to modern
birdo
did they keep her on queerly or are they
cis-washing an otherwise queer character
my money's on the former if they wanted
her to not exist they could pull at
disney and refuse to acknowledge her
existence while doing their best to wipe
her from history the decision to keep
her in the cast indicates that they are
validating her girly thoughts referenced
in the manual either way you'd have to
admit that this is an instance of aaa
gaming learning from cultural feedback
and adapting to responses which is
wild but
stranger things have happened but
as time goes on and representation
becomes more and more of a visible
conversation
nintendo's right there with us
being weird about it
[Music]
in this modern day of throwing around
the word agenda
at any available opportunity it's tough
to say what nintendo's agenda is when it
comes to representation and meanwhile
now that i said it i'd like to know
exactly how agenda came to receive such
a negative tone having an agenda just
means you have a collection of
appointments and schedule dates
the implication in reference to the gay
agenda is that there is some end goal in
mind and so when queer folks dismiss the
idea of having an agenda
i get confused
because you know
the road to rights does take a lot of
political planning in order to pass
various hurdles and milestones maybe if
we had an agenda things would be going a
bit smoother for our american queer
siblings than it is maybe the agenda
ended with marriage and since then queer
organizations have been running around
like headless chickens acting reactively
to bigoted countermeasures maybe we got
bullied out of having an agenda and
since then queer circles have been
lacking for any organizational skills
whatsoever because when you don't have a
gay agenda you end up looking a lot like
nintendo's take on gender and sexuality
in their post-wii era of game
development which at times kind of feels
like they're throwing every opinion they
can muster onto a dartboard like
nintendo doesn't really miss the mark
entirely but at the same time it's not
fantastic either which on one hand the
lack of gender spectacle is kind of what
queer audiences are looking for but on
the other hand
there's this ambiguous laziness that
kind of triggers the need to overanalyze
that a lot of us have starting with the
bad we have nintendo's infamous
weirdness when it came to tomodachi life
tomodachi life was the second
installment in a social simulation
franchise made by nintendo the first
tamadachi collection was a japan only
release and when the sequel was
announced for the 3ds the distinct lack
of an option to engage in same-gender
relationships was immediately brought to
the front this was an issue provided
that other life sims had already made
same gender relations an easily
available option with the sims kind of
setting the standard nintendo's first
response was that they based this new
game on code from the original and that
it would be too difficult to release a
patch to change it
which
given that dlc even in those days was
more or less a patch to an existing game
i don't know what the fuss was about in
this way at least you can say that
tomodachi life is a mirror to our social
structures for how
bizarrely deep heteronormativity is
encoded into our society's expectations
that you can't just patch the game so
that little fake digital people have the
same social interactions with he him
avatars as they do with she her post
release and following negative reception
and negative press to the mechanic
nintendo released the statement
we never intended to make any form of
social commentary with the launch of the
game
which i don't know who approved that
statement
but that just makes it a whole lot worse
to me don't you love when your life is
automatically social commentary i'm so
exhausted
from being a social commentary i guess
this whole channel is just social
commentary making a social commentary of
media which is in and of itself a social
commentary i guess we're all just social
commentaries
new gender identity nintendo did say
that if they were to make a third
installment of the game they would
strive to design a gameplay experience
from the ground up that is more
inclusive etc etc etc yeah well
they haven't made the third game so in
reality this controversy likely arose
from the game's presence in japan where
the game is marketed as an all ages
social sim and where japanese censorship
laws prohibit queerness at least
same-sex relations from being in all
ages content gay and lesbian romances
and personality types are something that
nintendo has flirted with in the past
and present albeit indirectly most
commonly in their most prolific
narrative series the legend of zelda
barring the strong indication that
several if not all versions or
reincarnations of link across the
franchise are gay or bisexual no i will
not be taking questions there are other
queer elements in the franchise that
being said a queer link is something
that is impossible to find conclusive
evidence of nintendo has made staunch
work to assure that link is a voiceless
cipher for the player very little beyond
the bare minimum of each game is done to
facilitate any personality for link link
is meant to be the connection that the
audience has to high rule itself so the
less personality the better because it
allows the player to feel like they are
experiencing the world rather than
observing someone else experiencing the
world which neither is necessarily
better than the other but link is
usually handled exceptionally well some
of you may notice that the zelda games
that are best received are the ones
where link has less of a personal
involvement in the game itself both
twilight princess and skyward swords
suffer from this and while each has its
fanbase audiences at large had trouble
connecting with them in both cases the
game struggled with an eluded romantic
interest for link so a player may feel
uncomfortable not knowing to what extent
they were witness to the actions of a
character and what nintendo was telling
them they ought to do one may say
there's a problem with forced
heterosexuality depicted in these titles
link himself as a result is frequently
subject to any number of ships
specifically in games where
you know
nintendo doesn't try to force him into a
hetero corner most notably prince cydon
from breath of the wild comes to mind
which itself features in-game
interactions that maybe even dive into
queerbaiting not to say that breath of
the wild doesn't also suffer from some
very
forced heterosexuality issues of its own
they had all the chemistry of oil and
water and yet she wanted to get married
also not the only time link had been
forcibly pushed into a marriage
engagement with a fish woman meanwhile
is no mystery why the fish boy with the
transatlantic accent is the only one he
had any meaningful physical contact with
quick link tenderly embraced me
to save the world of course but now
we're getting into the territory of
reading into things and the straight
people hate it when we do that but it's
fine when they do it
don't worry about it but once again
it is much more clear that sidon is more
attracted to link than link is to him
which while the main character is rarely
depicted with romantic chemistry
nintendo does shyly include queer
illusions sometimes accidentally
stepping into trans ones in ocarina of
time zelda disguises herself and hides
in plain sight as sheik a shika agent
who guides link through hyrule who
presents as a man
and while this was quote just a disguise
sheik has been adopted by queer elements
of the zelda fandom regardless the
titular character of zelda herself is a
bit of a mixed bag of a mixed bag when
it comes to gender expression it seems
as far as a pattern goes that zelda
becomes less capable the more frills her
skirts have her role ranges from badass
to damsel often being both in the same
game like with ocarina of time the
second she puts on a dress and she just
gets snatched up same thing with wind
waker that said this franchise is weird
in general when it comes to women and
capability for instance the gerudo a
desert fairing race exclusively made up
of women were introduced in ocarina of
time but have become a franchise staple
these independent ladies who featured in
many zelda games since either as neutral
npcs or antagonists have a staunch
warrior vibe and regularly carry weapons
in these sections of the game link is
forced to use stealth and go unnoticed
presumably because link though a
competent warrior cannot face the full
force of these women in open combat
gerudo culture in the game focuses
around leaving the desert to find
husbands in spite of the fact that this
is a whole race of ladies with abs
thighs legs and back muscles there is an
in-game cultural obsession with finding
a husband there's a nighttime classroom
in the settlement dedicated to teaching
young ladies how to snag a man the
deceased leader herbosa is lightly
inferred to be a lesbian but the best
reference we have to same-sex relations
in the body of the gerudo population is
that some ladies simply have no interest
in finding a husband and while breath of
the wild freely engages in a widespread
commentary about monogamous heterosexual
romantic dynamics of hyrule we are
reminded that same gender attraction is
a commentary nintendo is not willing to
get into in fact any illusion about
lesbian relations among the gerudo are
so scant
that i can't even call it queerbaiting
y'all know by now i'll say anything is
queerbaited but i should give nintendo
some credit for filling out my favorite
trope of all time
the incredibly handyman who is also
effeminate as fine
which abundantly femme construction
workers
is also a staple of 3d zelda games is he
you know and really all of this wouldn't
be as much of a problem
if it weren't for the growing trend of
video games to become more dynamic and
complex on a social level even tots
these days are becoming freakishly
culturally literate so games require a
greater exploration of personality types
to flush out npcs some of these
personality types just so happen to be
queer
and let's face it
we're hilarious it really sucks the
queer bigotry exists because this whole
damn community is right for roasting
there's a reason so many gay directors
make bad comedies about us but is that
what queerness is to this franchise a
punchline
i would agree if effeminate men and
masculine women were played exclusively
for laughs or if there was an element of
mockery
however neither link nor anyone else
respond to these characters negatively
everyone in this world kind of
goes along with everyone else
it's a non-issue
and like bolson and his twink and bolson
and the other construction workers their
prancing femininity doesn't really
interfere with their ability to work
while there can be an argument made
about the gerudo being gender critical
exclusionary gatekeepers
they do permit gorons who have no gender
to enter the village and at the end of
the day in spite of the guards posted
outside groto village nobody's checking
anyone else's pants for entrance into
otherwise fem exclusive spaces and once
link's inside nobody really questions it
even though there are some raised
eyebrows around town so in spite of the
fact that he's slightly clockable
nobody cares
nobody be like the gerudo
and just
get on with your life in fact for the
zelda franchise as a whole as much as i
can't really celebrate it for being woke
it doesn't seem to be doing anything
explicitly wrong either maybe little
nitpicky things sure but broad strokes
it's staggeringly neutral which i have
it on good authority that those who are
queer of gender sometimes really
relish in the opportunity to not think
about gender and gender dynamics in some
ways
this is very much nintendo's philosophy
for games they produce kind of pay no
attention to the gender behind the
curtain while at the same time they also
seem to like distributing games
where gender expression is at the very
center of the attention
[Music]
pokemon is generally considered an old
franchise even though it was first
released in 1996 while early on you were
forced to play as a boy later games
allowed you to pick either a boy or a
girl to play as which has carried on
through future installments though this
seems like a simple choice a little
binary given that gender restricts what
clothes you can wear in the most recent
games pokemon has plenty more weirdness
when it comes to gender a pokemon's
gender never really mattered in the
games until the breeding mechanic was
introduced which cue the torrent of
grown-ass gay pokemon fans snickering to
themselves first of all gender is
probably uh
not the best term to use for discussing
procreation but this is also a world
where inter-species breeding has its
advantages we're already off the rails
so why not just dive in various pokemon
have separate evolutions depending upon
their gender but also some pokemon with
distinctly feminine or masculine traits
are exclusively female or male however
there are some curious exceptions namely
the ralts family rods can be male or
female at a 50 rate first of all ralts
has a white robe in its first stage very
non-gendered but evolves into corellia
by default corellia evolves into
gardevoir male or female who is probably
one of the most rule 34 pokemon out
there however
ralts has another third stage evolution
which is only available to male coreleas
the ballet inspired effeminate dancing
psychic and later psychic fairy dual
type can be exposed to hrt i mean the
dawn stone and evolve into the psychic
fighting type glade
significantly more masculine and there's
a flip side to this too a female snow
runt will evolve into a frost last when
exposed to a dust stone otherwise male
or female will evolve into glaily you
know to mirror the evolution progress of
ralts game freak the producer of core
pokemon games as a subsidiary of
nintendo has been a bit more nonchalant
about sneaking in adult humor and
references into their games
you know the kind of stuff that goes
over the kids heads kind of like
sesame street from the 80s and early 90s
but game freak also likes to toss in a
queer nod every once in a while and
unlike parent company nintendo it's a
little less ambiguous as long as you
know what's what like in pokemon xy's
random battle manor you may come across
a beauty trainer who says yes a mere
half year ago i was a black belt
quite the transformation wouldn't you
say and it should be highlighted that
beauty is a title for trainers that are
exclusively women and that black belts
are titles that apply exclusively to
male trainers this is also to say
nothing of game freak's habit of
throwing on very cute little young love
overtones when it comes to scripting
your character's rival regardless of
gender including a very strong allusion
to the principal characters of red and
blue being a traveling pokemon duo who
just
may be more than friends and trainers
but unlike our beauty queen this is a
little bit too subtle to be visible
representation even though chatty boy
and quiet boy are kind of an archetypal
gay couple but given all the other
evidence it seems like game freak's
heart is in the right place someday they
will kiss
and i will live to see it this is also
in conjunction with the fact that some
pokemon just don't have a gender
especially the legendary types like mew
so hear this my non-binary genderqueer
friends as far as pokemon is concerned
you are legendary and while it may have
taken a while parent company nintendo
has caught up to this meh approach of
gender identity for playable characters
both splatoon 2 at least and animal
crossing's new horizon allow players to
swap genders willy-nilly and with no
discernible change to body type or
clothing availability especially with
new horizons there isn't really a limit
to mismatching otherwise traditionally
gendered clothing realistically
everything is kind of urban in unisex
and splatoon anyway where really the
only difference is available hairstyles
do you identify as a fade or a ponytail
now what's fun about this is while
nintendo is widely known for being
squeaky clean provider of all ages
electronic entertainment they've started
to dip their toes into stuff that's a
little more
exciting
[Music]
in stark contrast to the wholesome pay
it no mind genderlessness of splatoon
and animal crossing nintendo also owns
by proxy of sega and platinum games
bayonetta all right nintendo doesn't own
it but there is an exclusivity agreement
maybe nintendo wanted a high octane
action game to help move the floundering
wii u off shelves
maybe they wanted to get back in touch
with their sensual love hotel side
maybe they wanted counter programming to
their regular content who knows because
if they wanted to present an m rated
title they could have gone with
something far less extra bayonetta is
about the horniest campiest game you can
possibly find from anything anywhere
near a triple-a title yeah devil may cry
comes close but bayonetta is queer
culture and i don't mean that
figuratively the in-lore magical dance
moves is voguing a dance style developed
within queer circles and on the streets
of queer heavy urban centers voice
delivery and animation is straight out
of a drag performance it's not christmas
without caviar and it's all done so
shamelessly clear
that i still get a little shooketh when
i see straight gamers on twitter
insisting that this is all done for the
male gays honey
the kind of males this game is made for
are the gays but whatever understanding
your media your way is your prerogative
i'm not saying that all bayonetta fans
are gay
but
there is a pattern
and it's there for a reason bayonetta
exists in stark contrast to metroid in
that samus is powerful in spite of her
gender mowing down aliens with a power
suit is kind of a unisex look whereas
the power of umbra witches seems to be
drawn from their gender or rather from
their expression of gender they vogue to
open up portals to hell and use magical
hair extensions to literally bind a
demon and puppet them into munching down
hordes of angels this is also probably
the most faithful depiction of
biblically accurate angels in any form
of major media to date now my take on
voguing is that opposed to dance forms
like ballet where the focus is upon
grace and finesse vogue's focus is on
power actions that are otherwise supple
and delicate are exaggerated to grand
flourishes femininity is the highlight
but a performance of vogue that is
understated isn't going to win the crowd
or the judges unshakable regal authority
is the objective be someone who cannot
be pushed off the stage it's very
interesting that bayonetta takes that
principle and applies it to hellish
summons to witchcraft for which men in
history have used that accusation to
take power away from women whereas in
the lore of bayonetta when
wrenching these kinds of monsters out of
hell it's a fun extra layer of lore that
a single flinch or yielding one's
queenish authority
could lose control of the summon however
next to nintendo's whole library this is
just one title which
definitely earns its hard m rating not
just the violence but as witch clothing
is made out of their own hair which they
also use to summon monsters you spend
about 20 percent of the game tits out
there are also a significant number of
nintendo titles that i haven't played or
that i haven't played in some time i
hear fire emblem has some touch and go
representation although i'm intrigued by
the fabulous outfits and beautiful anime
boys and honestly when it comes to
captain toad or kirby i can't imagine
gender discourse is front and center
there so as always you're free to
discuss in the comments below
[Music]
now the problem with assessing nintendo
for its take on gender and sexuality is
that
it's barely a take to begin with outside
of tomodachi life which they addressed
in a statement as being a bad move
nintendo doesn't really have any strong
inclination one way or another peach has
a female empowerment moment in odyssey
which is fine but giving a girl boss
moment to otherwise stalk female
characters has kind of already been done
gender and sexual identity in nintendo
games are so low presentation that it's
really hard to celebrate or criticize
them which honestly is fascinating that
they're managing to stay so middle of
the road in this day and age when
every executive is expected to have a
canned response about queer issues and
while everyone's looking to disney for a
whopping 12 seconds of queer
representation in doctor strange and
while ea is under a magnifying glass for
equal opportunity queer romance options
nintendo
is escaping a lot of the scrutiny could
it be that disney is simply held up on a
pedestal for laying the psychosexual
foundation for little tots and children
defining for them what their romantic
expectations are as they grow up as a
monopoly and that ea and their
contemporaries are explicitly going out
of their way to build their games like a
paint by numbers canvas for which the
simple omission of a particular color
would stand out by contrast the extent
of nintendo's gender and sexuality
conditioning usually begins and ends at
mario getting a kiss on the cheek from
peach so queer rep doesn't really feel
particularly absent
because cishet rep is also lacking
gender discourse isn't really necessary
for creating the kind of gaming
experiences nintendo is trying to give
the player in many cases it seems
nintendo is trying to generate worlds
where the player brings with them their
own experiences and expectations but
what i can't really decide is whether
nintendo's approach is good
or bad certainly nintendo creates an
environment where cultures and social
leanings are player developed the best
example of this is in splatoon where
players can generate messages and images
to project other players frequently the
game is host to a trend of proudly
proclaiming one's identity as a queer
person and or furry and nintendo doesn't
seem inclined to remove these images
while they do remove bigotry bigots
can't find a place to feel at home in
inkopolis so the player base can
superimpose queerness into the otherwise
absent culture of the game whereas the
textual depiction of the game is
characteristically mostly neutral the
principal exception are splatoon 2's
hosts pearl and marina who are
girlfriends in everything but name i
would call this baiting except that this
eluded lesbian couple is the closest
thing that the splatoon franchise has to
any kind of relationship it's just not a
part of the game's atmosphere so i
really don't know how to qualify that
queer rep is something that nintendo's
content never really promised but as
games become more dynamic there is
naturally going to be a call
for a greater range of identities going
forward for instance npcs and zelda
games will get stale if they can't
switch up the kinds of interactions you
can have that said in spite of
nintendo's avoidance of starting a
gender discourse
they really don't shy away from it while
no character has ever really gone out of
their way to explain to link that they
them pronouns are plausible in hyrule
nintendo certainly doesn't mind playing
npc characters against type queerness is
displayed
but it's not explained or justified
which to a cultural benefit
nintendo still does direct its games
primarily at a youth audience
maybe not it's subsidiaries but
nintendo proper because the next
generation of gamers will play these
games and spot the internal cultural
acceptance of suggested queerness which
means that they have queerness
associated with a positive experience in
a virtual world which establishes a
channel of influence for this young
gamer to also approach queerness this
way in real life that being
gender is only a big deal if the
individual wants it to be in which case
it's really not worth getting up in arms
over queer people like bird people octo
people and mushroom people simply
are
the alternative which we normally see in
gaming is a grand spectacle about gender
and sexual identity being represented
going hand in hand with the marketing
campaign to let gaming news and everyone
who reads it know
who's going to be seen in an upcoming
title and maybe there is some benefit to
that but from everything i've seen
propping up a queer character on a
pedestal does little to convince bigots
to come around to allyship especially in
m rated titles you're dealing with an
audience who are not likely on the fence
about the topic at that point but how
can you quantify
and measure a transgenerational
reduction in homophobia specifically as
a result of a couple of prominent if not
entirely obvious gay lumberjacks in
breath of the wild it's so much easier
for queer media to quantify the effect
that an anti-bigotry plotline has in an
rpg when it comes to the gender as
aesthetic approaches and splatoon and
animal crossing which allow players to
swap at any given time
can we really understand at this time
what an impact that will have on the
next generation of trans or non-binary
teenagers or allies again i feel that
queer bigotry exists less among
individuals who are raised in situations
where queerness itself is unremarkable
and though we have no specific
representation from nintendo either
deliberately or inadvertently this is
the kind of mindset around gender that
nintendo seems to be projecting this
process establishes a normative
environment where playing with gender
and gender expression is both possible
and entirely irrelevant to your gaming
experience
to which the youngins may ask themselves
if it's possible virtually
why not in real life why does my gender
expression need to be such a big deal in
real life when it's not in a nintendo
game and to those who may grow up and be
indoctrinated into a bigoted mindset
nintendo opening a game by saying that
it's possible to switch your gender
whenever you like and that it has no
effect on gameplay
may normalize the idea of gender
non-conformity which
now we're getting into the wild wild
world of bigotry and gaming which is a
rabbit hole that doesn't ever stop once
you jump in given that there is a new
wave of bigots using
child grooming
as a publicly acceptable shield to
disguise their bigotry
nintendo being the child-friendly gaming
studio would no doubt come under fire if
they made gender and sexuality any more
overt than they already do and that
seems like a controversy the company
does not want to deal with i wouldn't be
surprised if the developers feel like
they have to walk on eggshells their
existing fandom already seems to dangle
by a thread every other nintendo direct
and army of fans take to social media to
decry the company for not dropping any
announcements for their personally
anticipated game part of me is glad that
smash brothers post release content on
the switch is slowed down because now
people can stop
being upset that master chief isn't the
next smash fighter a widespread assault
from
definitely not homophobic parents would
not likely tank the company since
nintendo has cash reserves that could
see them lose money for decades without
going under but it would put a stress on
the creative side of game making and as
a creator i can say my creative process
becomes a whole lot less fun the more
restrictive it is big shout out to my
patrons by the way thank you and when
things aren't fun to make
they're not fun to experience so i
understand that politically nintendo is
in a sticky spot
as per censorship regulations existing
audiences concerned parents and gaming
toxicity as a whole that said
you can't shake a stick in a gay bar
without whacking a muscle bear with a
tattoo of jigglypuff or kirby the gays
have put out for nintendo and friends
and even if we're not explicitly
depicted
we aren't shunted and rejected either in
real life
you can't just go around asking people
about their birth gender or at least
you shouldn't so it would be wrong for
nintendo to establish that precedence if
birdo's not the kind of trans lady who
likes to bring up her gendered
experiences
then
she's just not that kind of girl and
that's fine in real queer communities
especially in north america we're
engaged in a hearty debate about needing
real-life queer icons
while
also
claiming that it is important to come
out on one's own terms so celebrities
face enormous pressure to come out in
spite of the possibility that their
careers may be destroyed
which despite what you think
it's still a very real possibility but a
lot of us seem not to care about that
and care more about needing the icon of
a queer celeb because while we talk
about the need for visibility we risk
pigeonholing ourselves into a mindset
where we treat people as symbols or
icons and yes that even includes
fictional people who often serve as
models of available options for how we
can live our lives
treating people as symbols to signify
certain identities may not be sexual but
it is nevertheless an objectification of
someone that is reducing someone's
personhood to being an object with a
specific purpose and intention rather
than honoring their right to exist as a
person
[Music]
weirdly enough i find that nintendo may
very well be the first major studio of
media providers to give us regular
consistent queerness if not explicit
queer representation not because they
particularly have an agenda to do so
but that nintendo knows how to shift
when culture shifts that's how they've
kept themselves around for so long these
are developers who have been working in
creative fields since the 80s rather
than executives who are trying to sell
you loot boxes reflecting culture seems
to be an integral component of creation
and i find creators want to express
their view of society and their work and
really when you think about it nintendo
has been normalizing non-typical gender
expression for almost 40 years
from samus being their most badass space
marine to link being more than a little
comfortable in gerudo drag they've never
been shy about subverting your
expectations when it comes to gender and
though they avoid stating the sexuality
of almost any of their characters
maybe that's okay you don't get a lot of
gay romance options in nintendo games
but you don't get a whole hell of a lot
of straight ones either in many cases
the heterosexuality is just as inferred
as the homosexuality we read the
straightness into their games because
that's the default we've grown up with
we assume link and zelda are an item
even though the vast majority of the
games do not show them that way we
assume mario and peach are together if
not married but the most loving mario
ever gets from peach is a kiss on the
cheek who knows maybe she's got her own
princess in another castle if nothing
else at a time when the queer community
is being demonized by major figures in
politics trying to reinforce cisgender
heterosexuality as the only acceptable
game mode
nintendo games almost seem like a breath
of fresh air because they're not shoving
their binary gender heterosexuality in
our faces it's kind of a safe space for
the people who don't fit the default
mode and i think that might be enough
nintendo isn't trying to be the gayest
company in the world
but they're not trying to let the bigots
save face
like that other company that's known for
producing formative media
plus nintendo switch was the first
console to release hades and if that
isn't an ally move i don't know what is
and nintendo games give me a bit of hope
in an odd way
like in breath of the wild
the kingdom fell to the destructive
hatred of the calamity but it didn't
last forever
people of all sorts of different genders
and races and sexualities yes i'm
counting sidon come together to fight
back the darkness and they won
and so will we
we just have to stick together focus our
energy and fight
when we do that
nothing can stand in our way
[Music]
[Applause]
you